The protests started on 15 March 2011, when protesters marched in the capital of Damascus, demanding democratic reforms
and the release of political prisoners. The security forces retaliated by opening fire on the protesters,[150] and
according to witnesses who spoke to the BBC, the government forces detained six of them.[151] The protest was triggered
by the arrest of a boy and his friends by the government for writing a graffiti called "The people want the fall of the
regime", in the city of Daraa.[150][152] Louai al-Hussein, an analyst and writer wrote that "Syria is now on the map of
countries in the region with an uprising", referencing the Arab Spring which was concurrently starting.[152] On the
20th, the protesters burned down a Ba'ath Party headquarters and "other buildings". The ensuing clashes claimed the
lives of seven police officers[153] and 15 protesters.[154] Ten days later in a speech, President Bashar al-Assad
blamed "foreign conspirators" pushing Israeli propaganda for the protests.[155]

Protests in Douma
The protesters' demands until 7 April were predominantly democratic reforms, release of political prisoners, more
freedom, abolition of the emergency law and an end to corruption. After 8 April, the emphasis in demonstration slogans
gradually shifted towards the call for overthrowing the Assad government. Protests spread: on Friday 8 April, they
occurred simultaneously in ten cities. By Friday 22 April protests occurred in twenty cities. On 25 April, the Syrian
Army started a series of large-scale deadly military attacks on towns, using tanks, infantry carriers, and artillery,
leading to hundreds of civilian deaths. By the end of May 2011, 1,000 civilians[156] and 150 soldiers and
policemen[157] had been killed and thousands detained;[158] among the arrested were many students, liberal activists
and human rights advocates.[159]

Significant armed rebellion against the state began on 4 June in Jisr al-Shugur, a city in Idlib Governorate near
the Turkish border, after security forces on a post office roof had fired at a funeral demonstration. Protesting
mourners set fire to the building, killing eight security officers, and then overran a police station, seizing weapons
from it. Violence continued and escalated over the following days. Unverified reports claim that a portion of the
security forces in Jisr defected after secret police and intelligence officers executed soldiers who had refused to
fire on civilians.[160] Later, more protesters in Syria took up arms, and more soldiers defected to protect protesters.

Both sides in the conflict use propaganda to promote their side and denigrate their opponents (see Reporting, censoring
and propaganda in the Syrian Civil War). By the end of July 2011, around 1,600 civilians and 500 security forces had
been killed and 13,000 arrested.