DNA analysis from 16S rRNA sequences[6] has supported a hypothesis, originally suggested by Cleveland and colleagues
in 1934, that these insects are most closely related to wood-eating cockroaches (genus Cryptocercus, the woodroach).
This earlier conclusion had been based on the similarity of the symbiotic gut flagellates in the wood-eating cockroaches
to those in certain species of termites regarded as living fossils.[7] In the 1960s additional evidence supporting that
hypothesis emerged when F. A. McKittrick noted similar morphological characteristics between some termites and
Cryptocercus nymphs.[8] These similarities have led some authors to propose that termites be reclassified as a single
family, Termitidae, within the order Blattodea, which contains cockroaches.[9][10] Other researchers advocate the more
conservative measure of retaining the termites as Termitoidae, an epifamily within the cockroach order, which preserves
the classification of termites at family level and below.[11]

The oldest unambiguous termite fossils date to the early Cretaceous, but given the diversity of Cretaceous termites and
early fossil records showing mutualism between microorganisms and these insects, it is likely that they originated
earlier in the Jurassic or Triassic.[12][13][14] Further evidence of a Jurassic origin is the assumption that the
extinct Fruitafossor consumed termites, judging from its morphological similarity to modern termite-eating mammals.[15]
The oldest termite nest discovered is believed to be from the Upper Cretaceous in west Texas, where the oldest known
faecal pellets were also discovered.[16]

Claims for an earlier time period for the emergence of termites stand on controversial footing. For example, F. M.
Weesner indicated that Mastotermitidae termites may go back to the Late Permian, 251 million years ago,[17] and fossil
wings that have a close resemblance to the wings of Mastotermes of the Mastotermitidae, the most primitive living
termite, have been discovered in the Permian layers in Kansas.[18] It is even possible that the first termites emerged
during the Carboniferous.[19] Termites are thought to be the descendants of the genus Cryptocercus.[9] The folded wings
of the fossil wood roach Pycnoblattina, arranged in a convex pattern between segments 1a and 2a, resemble those seen in
Mastotermes, the only living insect with the same pattern.[18] On the other hand, Krishna et al. consider that all of
the Paleozoic and Triassic insects tentatively classified as termites are in fact unrelated to termites and should be
excluded from the Isoptera.[20] Termites were the first social insects to evolve a caste system, evolving more than 100
million years ago.[21]


Evolutionary relationships of Blattodea, showing the placement of some termite families
It has long been accepted that termites are closely related to cockroaches and mantids, and they are classified in the
same superorder (Dictyoptera).[22][23] There is strong evidence suggesting that termites are highly specialised
wood-eating cockroaches.[24] The cockroach genus Cryptocercus shares the strongest phylogenetical similarity with
termites and is considered to be a sister-group to termites.[25][26] Termites and Cryptocercus share similar
morphological and social features: for example, most cockroaches do not exhibit social characteristics, but
Cryptocercus takes care of its young and exhibits other social behaviour such as trophallaxis and allogrooming.[27]
The primitive giant northern termite (Mastotermes darwiniensis) exhibits numerous cockroach-like characteristics that
are not shared with other termites, such as laying its eggs in rafts and having anal lobes on the wings.[28]
Cryptocercidae and Isoptera are united in the clade Xylophagodea.[29] Although termites are sometimes called "white
ants", they are actually not ants. Ants belong to the family Formicidae within the order Hymenoptera. The similarity of
their social structure to that of termites is attributed to convergent evolution.[30]

As of 2013, about 3,106 living and fossil termite species are recognised, classified in 12 families. The infraorder
Isoptera is divided into the following clade and family groups, showing the subfamilies in their respective
classification:[20]